Avoid the natural resource curse1
The availability of natural resources – from minerals to hydrocarbons to 
agricultural land and forestry - at a first look appears as a blessing, 
an easy shortcut to development, especially in times of rising terms
of trade like the current ones. In fact, they may turn out in the long-run
to be a curse. Exports of natural resources may induce the ‘Dutch decrease’: 
as it was noticed around forty years ago in the gas-exporting Netherlands, 
exchange rate appreciation was ‘crowding out’ industry by making it 
internationally less competitive. In turn, in so far as manufacturing and 
other increasing return activities such as knowledge-intensive services are
at the core of technological learning, The ‘Dutch disease’ also reduces the 
future learning potential. Production activities in natural resources are 
typically capital-intensive with a reduced demand of skilled labour. They 
favour polarization in income distribution. The big stakes involved in 
exploration and mining rights is easily conducive to corruption among
bureaucrats and politicians. And the problem has been recently compounded 
by privatization generally occurring under rapacious terms in favour of 
foreign mining companies and to the almost exclusive domestic benefit of 
few corrupt officials and middlemen. Of course in modern history resource-abundance 
has sometimes been conducive to growth, the most noticeable case being 19th 
century United States. However, this has occurred precisely
through a capital-intensive and resource-intensive industrialization process (Rosenberg
(1963), David and Wright (1997)). Without that, resource abundance can sustain growth for
some time especially when terms of trade improve and sectoral productivity is rising, 
but in the long term the small size in terms of overall employment of the 
resource-exploiting sector, the failure to tackle income inequality and the 
scarce overall learning efforts tend to erode the
economic benefits derived from natural resources exports. In fact, in order to avoid the
resource curse, rents have to be purposefully distributed against comparative advantages,
fostering diversification of production in knowledge intensive activities.
